---
layout: post
title: "2.12 Specify type facets for type definitions"
description: "Specify type facets for type definitions"
category: "2. EdmLib"
---

Users can specify various type facets for any reference to type defintions. The only constraint is that the type facets specified must apply to the underlying type of that type definition.

If you want to specify the type facets, you need to call this constructor:

{% highlight csharp %}
public EdmTypeDefinitionReference(
    IEdmTypeDefinition typeDefinition,
    bool isNullable,
    bool isUnbounded,
    int? maxLength,
    bool? isUnicode,
    int? precision,
    int? scale,
    int? spatialReferenceIdentifier);
{% endhighlight %}

Here is a sample code to create an EDM type definition reference with type facets.

{% highlight csharp %}
IEdmTypeDefinition typeDefinition = new EdmTypeDefinition("MyNS", "Title", EdmPrimitiveTypeKind.String);
IEdmTypeDefinitionReference reference = new EdmTypeDefinitionReference(typeDefinition,
    isNullable: true,
    isUnbounded: false,
    maxLength: 10,
    isUnicode: true);
{% endhighlight %}

Below listed the details of each parameter:

- `isNullable`: `true` to allow `null` values; `false` otherwise.
- `isUnbounded`: `true` to indicate `MaxLength="max"`; `false` to indicate that the `MaxLength` is a bounded value.
- `maxLength`: `null` for unspecified; other values for actual length. INVALID if `isUnbounded` is `true`.
- `isUnicode`: `true` if the encoding is Unicode; `false` otherwise; `null` for unspecified.
- `precision`: `null` for unspecified; other values for actual precision; MUST be non-negative.
- `scale`: `null` to indicate `Scale="variable"`; other values for actual scale; MUST be non-negative.
- `spatialReferenceIdentifier`: `null` to indicate `SRID="variable"`; other values for actual SRID; MUST be non-negative.

It's worth mentioning that if you call the constructor overload with two parameters, all the type facets will be auto-computed according to the OData protocol. For example, the default value of `SRID` is `0` for Geometry types or `4326` for Geography types.

{% highlight csharp %}
public EdmTypeDefinitionReference(
    IEdmTypeDefinition typeDefinition,
    bool isNullable);
{% endhighlight %}